BHARATIYA NYAYA SANHITA, 2023
(Act No. 45 of 2023)
[25th December, 2023]
[Effective from 1st July, 2024]

An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to offences. This Act replaces the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (IPC).

Section 1. Short title, commencement and application.
(1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of July, 2024.
(3) Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Sanhita for every act or omission contrary to the provisions thereof, of which he shall be guilty within India.

Section 4. Punishments.
The punishments to which offenders are liable under the provisions of this Sanhita are: Death, Imprisonment for life, Imprisonment (rigorous or simple), Fine, Community Service.

Section 45. Abetment of a thing.
A person abets the doing of a thing who—First, instigates any person to do that thing; or Secondly, engages with one or more other person in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing; or Thirdly, intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.

Section 61. Criminal conspiracy.
When two or more persons agree to do, or cause to be done, an illegal act or an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy.

Section 63. Rape.
A man is said to commit rape if he penetrates or does any act specified against the will, without consent, or with consent obtained by fear, fraud, or intoxication of a woman. Punishment: Imprisonment for not less than ten years extending to imprisonment for life, and fine.

Section 64. Punishment for rape.
Whoever commits rape shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term not less than ten years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 74. Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage modesty.
Whoever assaults or uses criminal force to any woman, intending to outrage or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby outrage her modesty, shall be punished with imprisonment up to five years and fine.

Section 79. Word, gesture or act intended to insult modesty of a woman.
Whoever, intending to insult the modesty of any woman, utters any words, makes any sound or gesture, or exhibits any object, shall be punished with imprisonment up to three years and fine.

Section 80. Dowry death.
Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called dowry death. Punishment: Imprisonment for not less than seven years extending to imprisonment for life.

Section 85. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.
Whoever, being the husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine. Cruelty means any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or to cause grave injury to life, limb or health, or harassment with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security.

Section 101. Murder.
If the act by which the death is caused is done with the intention of causing death, or if it is done with the intention of causing such bodily injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death, or if the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or if the person committing the act knows that it is so imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause death, the offence is murder. Punishment: Death or imprisonment for life, and fine.

Section 109. Attempt to murder.
Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge, and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment up to ten years and fine. If hurt is caused, the imprisonment may extend to imprisonment for life.

Section 115. Voluntarily causing hurt.
Whoever does any act with the intention of thereby causing hurt to any person, or with the knowledge that he is likely thereby to cause hurt to any person, and does thereby cause hurt to any person, is said voluntarily to cause hurt. Punishment: Imprisonment up to two years or fine up to ten thousand rupees.

Section 131. Assault.
Whoever makes any gesture, or any preparation intending or knowing it to be likely that such gesture or preparation will cause any person present to apprehend that criminal force is about to be used against him, is said to commit an assault.

Section 152. Acts endangering sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.
Whoever, purposely or knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, or by signs, or by visible representation, or by electronic communication or by use of financial means, or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite, secession or armed rebellion or subversive activities, or encourages feelings of separatist activities or endangers sovereignty or unity and integrity of India, shall be punished with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 302. Theft.
Whoever, intending to take dishonestly any movable property out of the possession of any person without that person's consent, moves that property in order to such taking, is said to commit theft. Punishment: Imprisonment up to three years or fine or both.

Section 303. Punishment for theft.
Whoever commits theft shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.

Section 309. Robbery.
In all robbery there is either theft or extortion. Theft is robbery if, in order to commit theft, the offender voluntarily causes or attempts to cause death, hurt, or wrongful restraint. Punishment: Rigorous imprisonment up to ten years and fine.

Section 316. Cheating.
Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived, is said to cheat. Punishment: Imprisonment up to three years or fine or both.

Section 318. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property.
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any person shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.

Section 324. Mischief.
Whoever with intent to cause, wrongful loss or damage to the public or to any person, causes destruction of any property, or any such change in any property as destroys or diminishes its value, commits mischief.

Section 329. Criminal trespass.
Whoever enters into or upon property in the possession of another with intent to commit an offence or to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in possession of such property, is said to commit criminal trespass. Punishment: Imprisonment up to three months or fine up to five hundred rupees or both.

Section 336. Forgery.
Whoever makes any false document or false electronic record with intent to cause damage or injury, to commit fraud, or to support any claim or title, is said to commit forgery. Punishment: Imprisonment up to two years or fine or both.

Section 351. Criminal intimidation.
Whoever threatens another with any injury to his person, reputation or property, or to the person or reputation of any one in whom that person is interested, with intent to cause alarm to that person, or to cause that person to do any act which he is not legally bound to do, commits criminal intimidation. Punishment: Imprisonment up to two years or fine or both.

Section 356. Defamation.
Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said to defame that person. Punishment: Simple imprisonment up to two years or fine or both.
