BHARATIYA NAGARIK SURAKSHA SANHITA, 2023
(Act No. 46 of 2023)
[25th December, 2023]
[Effective from 1st July, 2024]

An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to criminal procedure. This Act replaces the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC).

Section 1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.
(1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on the 1st day of July, 2024.

Section 35. Arrest — when police may arrest without warrant.
(1) Any police officer may, without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists.

Section 36. How arrest is to be made.
In making an arrest the police officer shall actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by word or action.

Section 40. Arrested person to be informed of grounds of arrest and of right to bail.
(1) Every police officer or other person arresting any person without warrant shall forthwith communicate to him full particulars of the offence for which he is arrested or other grounds for such arrest.
(2) Every person arrested shall be informed about his right to be released on bail.

Section 44. Person arrested not to be detained more than twenty-four hours.
No person shall be detained in custody for a period exceeding twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate's Court, without the order of a Magistrate.

Section 144. Order for maintenance of wives, children and parents.
If any person having sufficient means neglects or refuses to maintain his wife, his legitimate or illegitimate minor child, or his father or mother unable to maintain themselves, a Magistrate of the first class may order such person to make a monthly allowance for the maintenance of his wife, child, father or mother. The maximum maintenance amount is forty thousand rupees per month.

Section 163. Power to issue order in urgent cases of nuisance or apprehended danger.
A District Magistrate, a Sub-divisional Magistrate, or any other Executive Magistrate specially empowered by the State Government may direct any person to abstain from a certain act if such Magistrate considers that such direction is likely to prevent obstruction, annoyance, injury, or risk of obstruction, annoyance or injury, to any person lawfully employed.

Section 173. Information in cognizable cases (FIR).
(1) Every information relating to the commission of a cognizable offence, if given orally to an officer-in-charge of a police station, shall be reduced to writing by him or under his direction, and be read over to the informant, and every such information, whether given in writing or reduced to writing as aforesaid, shall be signed by the person giving it.
(2) A copy of the information as recorded shall be given forthwith, free of cost, to the informant.
(3) Any person aggrieved by a refusal on the part of an officer-in-charge of a police station to record the information referred to in sub-section (1) may send the substance of such information, in writing and by post, to the Superintendent of Police concerned.
(4) Every information shall be entered in a book to be kept by such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe.

Section 174. Information in non-cognizable cases.
(1) When information is given to an officer-in-charge of a police station of the commission of a non-cognizable offence, he shall enter or cause to be entered the substance of the information in a book to be kept by such officer.
(2) No police officer shall investigate a non-cognizable case without the order of a Magistrate having power to try such case.

Section 175. Power to investigate cognizable cases.
Any officer-in-charge of a police station may, without the order of a Magistrate, investigate any cognizable case which a Court having jurisdiction over the local area within the limits of such station would have power to inquire into or try.

Section 180. Examination of witnesses by police.
Any police officer making an investigation under this Chapter may examine orally any person supposed to be acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case. Such person shall be bound to answer truly all questions relating to such case put to him by such officer.

Section 187. Procedure when investigation cannot be completed in twenty-four hours.
(1) Whenever any person is arrested and detained in custody, and it appears that the investigation cannot be completed within the period of twenty-four hours, and there are grounds for believing that the accusation or information is well-founded, the officer-in-charge of the police station shall forthwith transmit to the nearest Judicial Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary and shall at the same time forward the accused to such Magistrate.
(2) The Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused for a term not exceeding fifteen days in the whole.

Section 193. Report of police officer on completion of investigation.
(1) Every investigation shall be completed without unnecessary delay.
(2) As soon as the investigation is completed, the officer-in-charge of the police station shall forward to the Magistrate empowered to take cognizance of the offence on a police report, a report in the form prescribed by the State Government.

Section 478. When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence.
(1) When any person accused of a non-bailable offence is arrested without warrant by a police officer and is prepared to give bail, such person may be released on bail.
(2) If it appears to such officer that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused has been guilty of an offence punishable with death or imprisonment for life, the accused shall not be released on bail.

Section 482. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest (Anticipatory Bail).
(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction that in the event of such arrest, he shall be released on bail.
(2) Such Court may grant anticipatory bail with conditions.

Section 528. Inherent powers of High Court.
Nothing in this Sanhita shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers of the High Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order under this Sanhita, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
