THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN FROM DOMESTIC VIOLENCE ACT, 2005
(Act No. 43 of 2005)

Section 2. Definitions.
(a) "aggrieved person" means any woman who is, or has been, in a domestic relationship with the respondent and who alleges to have been subjected to any act of domestic violence by the respondent;
(f) "domestic relationship" means a relationship between two persons who live or have, at any point of time, lived together in a shared household, when they are related by consanguinity, marriage, or through a relationship in the nature of marriage, adoption or are family members living together as a joint family;
(g) "domestic violence" has the meaning assigned to it in section 3;

Section 3. Definition of domestic violence.
For the purposes of this Act, any act, omission or commission or conduct of the respondent shall constitute domestic violence in case it—
(a) harms or injures or endangers the health, safety, life, limb or well-being, whether mental or physical, of the aggrieved person or tends to do so and includes causing physical abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse; or
(b) harasses, harms, injures or endangers the aggrieved person with a view to coerce her or any other person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any dowry or other property or valuable security.

Section 12. Application to Magistrate.
An aggrieved person or a Protection Officer or any other person on behalf of the aggrieved person may present an application to the Magistrate seeking one or more reliefs under this Act. Every application shall be disposed of within sixty days.

Section 17. Right to reside in a shared household.
Every woman in a domestic relationship shall have the right to reside in the shared household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial interest in the same. The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded from the shared household.

Section 18. Protection orders.
The Magistrate may pass a protection order prohibiting the respondent from committing any act of domestic violence, aiding or abetting in the commission of acts of domestic violence, entering the place of employment or school of the aggrieved person.

Section 19. Residence orders.
The Magistrate may direct the respondent to remove himself from the shared household, or to restrain the respondent from dispossessing the aggrieved person from the shared household.

Section 20. Monetary reliefs.
The Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetary relief to meet the expenses incurred and losses suffered by the aggrieved person—including loss of earnings, medical expenses, loss caused by destruction or damage of property, and maintenance for the aggrieved person and her children.

Section 22. Compensation orders.
The Magistrate may also direct compensation and damages for injuries, including mental torture and emotional distress caused by the respondent.

Section 31. Penalty for breach of protection order.
A breach of protection order by the respondent shall be an offence punishable with imprisonment up to one year or with fine up to twenty thousand rupees or with both.
