THE PAYMENT OF GRATUITY ACT, 1972
(Act No. 39 of 1972)

Section 2. Definitions.
(e) "employee" means any person who is employed for wages in any establishment to do any work and who gets wages not exceeding ten thousand rupees per month or such higher amount as may be notified by the Central Government.

Section 4. Payment of gratuity.
(1) Gratuity shall be payable to an employee on the termination of his employment after he has rendered continuous service for not less than five years—
(a) on his superannuation; or
(b) on his retirement or resignation; or
(c) on his death or disablement due to accident or disease.
(2) For every completed year of service or part thereof in excess of six months, the employer shall pay gratuity to an employee at the rate of fifteen days' wages based on the rate of wages last drawn by the employee.
(3) The amount of gratuity payable to an employee shall not exceed twenty lakh rupees.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the gratuity of an employee whose services have been terminated for any act, wilful omission or negligence causing damage or loss to the property belonging to the employer shall be forfeited to the extent of the damage or loss so caused.

Section 7. Determination of the amount of gratuity.
(1) A person who is eligible to receive gratuity shall send a written application to the employer within thirty days from the date the gratuity becomes payable.
(2) The employer shall determine the amount of gratuity and give notice in writing to the person to whom the gratuity is payable and also to the controlling authority specifying the amount of gratuity determined.
(3) The employer shall pay the gratuity within thirty days from the date it becomes payable. If not paid within this period, the employer shall pay simple interest at the rate not exceeding the rate notified by the Central Government.

Section 9. Penalty.
Whoever makes default in payment of gratuity shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to two years.
