THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947
(Act No. 14 of 1947)

Section 2. Definitions.
(j) "industry" means any systematic activity carried on by co-operation between an employer and his workmen for the production, supply or distribution of goods or services;
(s) "workman" means any person employed in any industry to do any manual, unskilled, skilled, technical, operational, clerical or supervisory work for hire or reward;

Section 9A. Notice of change.
No employer, who proposes to effect any change in the conditions of service applicable to any workman, shall effect such change without giving to the workmen likely to be affected by such change a notice of twenty-one days.

Section 11A. Powers of Labour Courts, Tribunals and National Tribunals to give appropriate relief in case of discharge or dismissal of workmen.
Where an industrial dispute relating to the discharge or dismissal of a workman has been referred to a Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal for adjudication and, in the course of the adjudication proceedings, the Labour Court, Tribunal or National Tribunal is satisfied that the order of discharge or dismissal was not justified, it may, by its award, set aside the order of discharge or dismissal and direct reinstatement of the workman on such terms and conditions, if any, as it thinks fit, or give such other relief to the workman including the award of any lesser punishment in lieu of discharge or dismissal.

Section 25F. Conditions precedent to retrenchment of workmen.
No workman employed in any industry who has been in continuous service for not less than one year under an employer shall be retrenched by that employer until—
(a) the workman has been given one month's notice in writing indicating the reasons for retrenchment;
(b) the workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for every completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in excess of six months;
(c) notice in the prescribed manner is served on the appropriate Government.

Section 25G. Procedure for retrenchment.
Where any workman in an industrial establishment is to be retrenched, the employer shall ordinarily retrench the workman who was the last person to be employed in that category, that is to say, the employer shall follow the principle of "last come, first go."

Section 25H. Re-employment of retrenched workmen.
Where any workmen are retrenched, and the employer proposes to take into his employ any persons, he shall give an opportunity to the retrenched workmen who are citizens of India to offer themselves for re-employment, and such retrenched workmen shall have preference over other persons.
