THE PAYMENT OF WAGES ACT, 1936
(Act No. 4 of 1936)
[23rd April, 1936]

An Act to regulate the payment of wages to certain classes of employed persons.

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
(1) This Act may be called the Payment of Wages Act, 1936.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.

Section 2. Definitions.
In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context—
(i) "employed person" includes the legal representative of a deceased employed person;
(ia) "employer" includes the legal representative of a deceased employer;
(ii) "factory" means a factory as defined in clause (m) of section 2 of the Factories Act, 1948;
(vi) "wages" means all remuneration (whether by way of salary, allowances, or otherwise) expressed in terms of money or capable of being so expressed which would, if the terms of employment, express or implied, were fulfilled, be payable to an employed person in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment;

Section 3. Responsibility for payment of wages.
Every employer shall be responsible for the payment to persons employed by him of all wages required to be paid under this Act. The employer shall fix wage periods in respect of which such wages shall be payable. No wage period shall exceed one month.

Section 4. Fixation of wage-periods.
(1) Every person responsible for the payment of wages under section 3 shall fix periods (in this Act referred to as wage-periods) in respect of which such wages shall be payable.
(2) No wage-period shall exceed one month.

Section 5. Time of payment of wages.
(1) The wages of every person employed in an establishment or a factory in which less than a thousand persons are employed shall be paid before the expiry of the seventh day after the last day of the wage-period in respect of which the wages are payable.
(2) The wages of every person employed in a factory or an establishment in which a thousand or more persons are employed shall be paid before the expiry of the tenth day after the last day of the wage-period.
(3) Where the employment of any person is terminated by or on behalf of the employer, the wages earned by him shall be paid before the expiry of the second working day from the day on which his employment is terminated.

Section 7. Deductions which may be made from wages.
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law for the time being in force, wages shall be paid to an employed person without deductions of any kind except those authorised by or under this Act.
(2) Deductions from the wages of an employed person shall be made only in accordance with the provisions of this Act, and shall not exceed—
(a) in cases where such deductions are wholly or partly made for the purposes mentioned in clause (b) to (i) of sub-section (2)—the total amount of deductions shall not exceed seventy-five per cent of such wages;
(b) in any other case, fifty per cent of such wages.

Section 8. Fines.
(1) No fine shall be imposed on any employed person save in respect of such acts and omissions on his part as the employer, with the previous approval of the State Government or of the prescribed authority, may have specified by notice under sub-section (2).
(2) A notice specifying such acts and omissions shall be exhibited in the prescribed manner on the premises in which the employment is carried on.
(3) No fine shall be imposed on any employed person until he has been given an opportunity of showing cause against the fine.
(4) The total amount of fine which may be imposed in any one wage-period on any employed person shall not exceed an amount equal to three per cent. of the wages payable to him in respect of that wage-period.

Section 9. Deductions for absence from duty.
No deductions shall be made from the wages of an employed person except on account of his absence from the place or places of employment. The amount of deduction shall in no case bear to the wages payable to the employed person in respect of the wage-period a larger proportion than the period of his absence bears to the total period.

Section 13. Application to appropriate authority.
Where contrary to the provisions of this Act any deduction has been made from the wages of an employed person, or any payment of wages has been delayed, such person himself, or any legal practitioner or any official of a registered trade union authorised in writing to act on his behalf, or any Inspector, or any other person acting with the permission of the authority appointed under sub-section (1), may apply to such authority for a direction.

Section 14. Penalty for offences under the Act.
(1) Whoever being responsible for the payment of wages to an employed person contravenes any of the provisions of this Act shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one thousand five hundred rupees but which may extend to seven thousand five hundred rupees.
(2) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 5, regarding the time of payment of wages, shall be punishable with an additional fine which may extend to seven hundred and fifty rupees for each day for which such contravention continues.

Section 15. Claims arising out of deductions from wages or delay in payment of wages.
(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation or any officer of the State Government not below the rank of Labour Commissioner as the authority to hear and decide for any specified area all claims arising out of deductions from the wages, or delay in payment of the wages, of persons employed or paid in that area.
