THE SEXUAL HARASSMENT OF WOMEN AT WORKPLACE (PREVENTION, PROHIBITION AND REDRESSAL) ACT, 2013

Section 2. Definitions.
(n) "sexual harassment" includes any one or more of the following unwelcome acts or behavior: physical contact and advances, a demand or request for sexual favours, making sexually coloured remarks, showing pornography, any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct of sexual nature.
(o) "workplace" includes any department, organization, undertaking, establishment, enterprise, institution, office, branch or unit, hospitals, nursing homes, educational institutions, sports institutes, studios, any transportation.

Section 3. Prevention of sexual harassment.
No woman shall be subjected to sexual harassment at any workplace.

Section 4. Constitution of Internal Complaints Committee.
Every employer of a workplace employing ten or more employees shall constitute a committee to be known as the Internal Complaints Committee.

Section 9. Complaint of sexual harassment.
Any aggrieved woman may make a complaint of sexual harassment at workplace to the Internal Complaints Committee or the Local Complaints Committee within three months from the date of incident.

Section 11. Inquiry into complaint.
The ICC shall proceed to make inquiry into the complaint. During the inquiry, the ICC may recommend transfer of the aggrieved woman or the respondent, grant leave to the aggrieved woman, and restrain the respondent from reporting on the work performance of the aggrieved woman.

Section 13. Action on inquiry report.
Where the ICC finds the allegation proved, the employer shall take action for sexual harassment as misconduct and take appropriate action including written apology, warning, reprimand, withholding of promotion, termination from service.

Section 26. Penalty for non-compliance.
If the employer fails to constitute an ICC or does not comply with provisions, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, and for repeated violation, the penalty shall be twice the earlier fine and also cancellation of his licence to carry on business.
