THE REAL ESTATE (REGULATION AND DEVELOPMENT) ACT, 2016
(Act No. 16 of 2016)

Section 3. Prior registration of real estate project with RERA Authority.
No promoter shall advertise, market, book, sell, or offer for sale, or invite persons to purchase in any manner any plot, apartment or building, in any real estate project or part of it, without registering the real estate project with the Real Estate Regulatory Authority.

Section 4. Application for registration.
Every promoter shall make an application to the Authority for registration of the real estate project. The application shall be accompanied by authenticated copy of approvals, the sanctioned plan, layout plan, proforma of the allotment letter, and a declaration stating the time period within which the project shall be completed.

Section 12. Obligations of promoter regarding insurance of building.
The promoter shall obtain all such insurances as may be notified by the appropriate Government. Such insurance shall be maintained until the real estate project is handed over to the allottees.

Section 14. Adherence to sanctioned plans and project specifications by the promoter.
The promoter shall not make any additions or alterations in the sanctioned plans, layout plans and specifications of the building without the previous consent of two-thirds of the allottees.

Section 18. Return of amount and compensation.
(1) If the promoter fails to complete or is unable to give possession of an apartment, plot or building—
(a) in accordance with the terms of the agreement, or due to discontinuance of his business or for any other reason, he shall be liable on demand to the allottees to return the amount received by him with interest at prescribed rate; or
(b) in case the allottee wishes to withdraw from the project, the promoter shall return the full amount including interest.

Section 19. Rights of allottee.
(1) The allottee shall be entitled to obtain the information relating to sanctioned plans, layout plans along with the specifications, approved by the competent authority.
(2) The allottee shall be entitled to know stage-wise time schedule of completion of the project.
(3) The allottee shall be entitled to claim the possession of apartment, plot or building on the date of completion as specified in the agreement for sale.

Section 31. Filing of complaints with RERA Authority.
(1) Any aggrieved person may file a complaint with the Authority or the adjudicating officer for any violation or contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations.
(2) The Authority shall dispose of the complaint within sixty days.
