THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT, 2005
(Act No. 22 of 2005)
[15th June, 2005]

An Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to information for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency and accountability.

Section 1. Short title, extent and commencement.
This Act may be called the Right to Information Act, 2005. It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.

Section 2. Definitions.
(f) "information" means any material in any form, including records, documents, memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders, logbooks, contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form;
(h) "public authority" means any authority or body or institution of self-government established or constituted by or under the Constitution or by any other law;
(j) "right to information" means the right to information accessible under this Act which is held by or under the control of any public authority;

Section 3. Right to information.
Subject to the provisions of this Act, all citizens shall have the right to information.

Section 4. Obligations of public authorities.
(1) Every public authority shall—
(a) maintain all its records duly catalogued and indexed;
(b) publish within one hundred and twenty days from the enactment of this Act all relevant facts while formulating important policies;
(d) provide reasons for its administrative or quasi-judicial decisions to affected persons.

Section 6. Request for obtaining information.
(1) A person, who desires to obtain any information under this Act, shall make a request in writing or through electronic means in English or Hindi or in the official language of the area, to the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer specifying the particulars of the information sought by him.
(2) An applicant making request for information shall not be required to give any reason for requesting the information or any other personal details except those that may be necessary for contacting him.
(3) The fee prescribed shall be reasonable and no fee shall be charged from any person who is below the poverty line.

Section 7. Disposal of request.
(1) Subject to the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 5 or the proviso to sub-section (3) of section 6, the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer shall, within thirty days of the receipt of the request, either provide the information on payment of such fee as may be prescribed or reject the request for any of the reasons specified in sections 8 and 9.
(5) If the Central Public Information Officer or State Public Information Officer fails to give decision on the request for information within the period specified, the request shall be deemed to have been refused.
(6) Where a request for information is rejected, the CPIO or SPIO shall communicate to the person the reasons for such rejection, the period within which an appeal can be preferred, and the particulars of the appellate authority.

Section 8. Exemption from disclosure of information.
(1) There shall be no obligation to give any citizen—
(a) information, disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity of India;
(b) information which has been expressly forbidden to be published by any court of law;
(d) information including commercial confidence, trade secrets or intellectual property;
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary relationship;
(j) information which relates to personal information the disclosure of which has no relationship to any public activity or interest.

Section 18. Powers and functions of Information Commissions.
(1) The Commission shall receive and inquire into a complaint from any person who has been unable to submit a request to a CPIO or SPIO, or who has been refused access to any information, or who has not been given a response within the time limit.

Section 19. Appeal.
(1) Any person who does not receive a decision within the specified time or is aggrieved by a decision of the CPIO or SPIO may prefer an appeal to such officer who is senior in rank to the CPIO or SPIO within thirty days.
(3) A second appeal against the decision under sub-section (1) shall lie within ninety days to the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission.

Section 20. Penalties.
(1) Where the Central Information Commission or the State Information Commission is of the opinion that the CPIO or SPIO has, without any reasonable cause, refused to receive an application, or has not furnished information within the time specified, or denied the request for information, or knowingly given incorrect, incomplete or misleading information, the Commission shall impose a penalty of two hundred and fifty rupees each day till the application is received or information is furnished, so however, the total amount of such penalty shall not exceed twenty-five thousand rupees.
