THE TRANSFER OF PROPERTY ACT, 1882
(Act No. 4 of 1882)

Section 52. Transfer of property pending suit relating thereto.
During the pendency in any Court of any suit or proceeding in which any right to immovable property is directly and specifically in question, the property cannot be transferred or otherwise dealt with by any party to the suit or proceeding so as to affect the rights of any other party thereto.

Section 105. Lease defined.
A lease of immoveable property is a transfer of a right to enjoy such property, made for a certain time, in consideration of a price paid or promised. The transferor is called the lessor, the transferee the lessee, the price the premium, and the money to be paid periodically is called the rent.

Section 106. Duration of certain leases in absence of written contract or local usage.
(1) In the absence of a contract or local law or usage to the contrary, a lease of immoveable property for agricultural or manufacturing purposes shall be deemed to be a lease from year to year, terminable, on the part of either lessor or lessee, by six months' notice.
(2) A lease of immoveable property for any other purpose shall be deemed to be a lease from month to month, terminable on the part of either lessor or lessee, by fifteen days' notice.

Section 107. Leases how made.
A lease of immoveable property from year to year, or for any term exceeding one year, or reserving a yearly rent, can be made only by a registered instrument. All other leases of immoveable property may be made either by a registered instrument or by oral agreement accompanied by delivery of possession.

Section 108. Rights and liabilities of lessor and lessee.
In the absence of a contract or local usage to the contrary, the lessor and the lessee have the following rights and shall be subject to the following liabilities:
(A) LESSOR:
(a) The lessor is bound to disclose to the lessee any material defect in the property;
(b) The lessor is bound to put the lessee in possession of the property;
(c) The lessor shall be deemed to covenant with the lessee that if the lessee pays the rent and performs the conditions of the lease, the lessor will not interfere with the lessee's possession;
(d) The lessor is bound to make repairs when the lessee notifies him.

(B) LESSEE:
(e) The lessee is bound to disclose to the lessor any fact which increases the value of the property;
(f) The lessee is bound to pay the rent (or the premium or both);
(g) The lessee is bound to keep and restore the property in as good condition as he received it, fair wear and tear excepted;
(h) The lessee must not erect any permanent structure on the property without the consent of the lessor;
(j) On the determination of the lease, the lessee is bound to put the lessor into possession of the property.

Section 111. Determination of lease.
A lease of immoveable property determines—
(a) by efflux of the time limited thereby;
(d) on the expiration of a notice to determine the lease, or to quit, or of intention to quit, the property leased;
(g) by forfeiture; that is to say, if the lessee breaks an express condition which provides that on breach thereof the lessor may re-enter.

Section 116. Effect of holding over.
If a lessee or under-lessee of property remains in possession thereof after the determination of the lease granted to the lessee, and the lessor or his legal representative accepts rent from the lessee or under-lessee, or otherwise assents to his continuing in possession, the lease is, in the absence of an agreement to the contrary, renewed from year to year, or from month to month.
